    In the first half of my project, I have focused on writing a program that accurately identifies the three-way connectivity patterns of a given graph, and on analyzing connectome datasets with it. The three-way connectivity pattern idea as a distinguishing feature for neuron connections comes from ‘Highly Nonrandom Features of Synaptic Connectivity in Local Cortical Circuits’, and after discussion with Christos, I’ve decided that this is the feature I will be examining in the connectome data and trying to produce with random generation. In my Github repo, the file ‘graph_connections.py’ takes an input folder, runs on all .graphml files within it, and produces information on their connection patterns. It does this by pruning all self-loops and parallel edges with the same direction, then classifies them into the 16 patterns used in ‘Highly Nonrandom Features of Synaptic Connectivity in Local Cortical Circuits’ using the number of edges and shared start/end points.
    
After classifying the actual connection patterns, the program also calculates the different pattern probabilities, given the probability of an edge in the graph as the number of edges in the graph over the number of possible edges for those nodes. These probabilities were calculated by hand from looking at the possible ways to choose a pattern given three nodes. The probability categories are in the Probability Sum.txt file, with p=0.3, to ensure it summed to one. Although the classification code and probability calculation may look messy, the predicted vs actual pattern probabilities for an Erdos Reyi graph (in the GeneratedGraphs file) indicates that both the classification and naive pattern probability prediction are working as intended.

Using these classification tools, I’ve been looking at connectome data sets from https://neurodata.io/project/connectomes/, and have analyzed sets from the macaque, mouse, rat and worm, these graph files and their results are in the ConnectomeGraphs file. So far, the largest set I have managed to run is 500 nodes, looking at all possible 3 node sets for 1000 nodes (166,167,000 combinations to test) is infeasible with my current program. The data has varied a lot more than I expected between the different samples. Both c.elegans data sets seem to be similar to the findings of the paper, with fewer two edge connections than predicted, and far more 3-6 edge connections. The mouse brain has an order of magnitude more edges, so it is hard to compare to the others with my current graphs. So far, I think that the best set is the rat dataset, because it has the most nodes, and some interesting patterns about preferred connection patterns rather than just number of edges occur.

My next step is to look at more random graph generation (other than Erdos Reyi as a sanity code check), and work on methods that can produce the connection patterns observed in some of these graphs and the paper I’ve mentioned. One possible route is considered in ‘Approximating Sparse Graphs: The Random Overlapping Communities Model’ by Samatha Petti and Santosh Vempala, which claims to be able to approximate any triangle ratio. In the next few weeks, I hope to come up with a method that can create some of the patterns seen in my data. I would also like to experiment with different sizes in the graph generation and run on more connectome data sets if I have time, to see if the connection patterns tend to shift more with subject or with the size of the brain sample.
